# birds-on-booze-bottles

## Summary Paper for course 7530

### **Design Goals**

Overall my design goals for this website were well met. Beyond providing users with a space to view label images with birds on them, the primary aim of the website was for users to be able to explore image labels by category. This was achieved through a multi‑level dropdown menu which allows users to explore the available images by bird, beverage [“booze”], or country. In future, my goal would be to build a database behind the website using SQL and PHP so that users are able to more fluidly explore images and compare multiple categories side by side. For example, users of the current site can explore labels with images of owls on them or of beverages made in Japan. With a database built behind the site, users would be able to view images which meet both these parameters rather than only one or the other. 

Aside from the main content of the site, I also aimed to provide users with information both about the project and the use of the site. The About page provides users with both a space to learn about the intent of the site and explains the purpose of each key feature. Another goal of the site was to provide a way to contact the site administrator, including an option for users to submit their own images for addition to the site. I was able to successfully provide users with an interactive Contact page which allows them to submit a message and includes the option of attaching an image. 

Finally, I aimed to design my site so that it was usable for both persons with slower internet connections as well as for people with different usability/accessibility needs. While I did enter alternate text for all the site images and did my best to follow best practice with site layout by appropriately labelling sections and features within the code (headers, images, navigation menus, etc.), my focus on this area of the design ended up falling lower on the priority list than I would like. With the number of new things I had to learn in building this website and tutorials which I followed, often the usability and accessibility of the site were set aside in lieu of simply making the site function. My goal for the future of the website would be to adjust certain features and functions, now that I understand how to build them, and adjust them to ensure the overall site is accessible to the widest number of users possible. 

I am pleased with the final outcome of the website but would like in future to improve my understanding of responsive design so that the site is also mobile friendly. Additionally, the areas of the site using Javascript are functioning, but I only vaguely understand how these areas are working based on the tutorials which I followed. In order to improve on the functionality of the site as a general as well as for mobile, I would like to focus in future on improving my understanding and fluency with further coding languages as well as the various ways to implement responsive design. 

### **Above and Beyond**

There are several areas of my website which required me to go beyond the basic requirements for this project. First, in addition to HTML and CSS, I used Javascript for my website to implement the collapsible sidebar menu, the dropdowns within this menu, and the sticky headbar of the site. Using Javascript was the most difficult part of the process in building this site as I had no experience with Javascript prior to the start of this project and, after implementation, my understanding of how this language functions is still shaky at best. 

Second most difficult were the individual label pages linked to in the Explore section of the website. This feature was not difficult as far as the coding itself went, however due to the large number of these pages (357 in total) it was a complex and tedious process ensuring that all the pages were linked to correctly both from the individual explore pages as well as from label page to label page within each explore section. As mentioned in section “Design Goals” my future goal is to build a database behind this website. While this will be a complex process in and of itself, it would remove the complicated network of pages currently necessary to make the Explore feature of the site work. 

Finally, I attempted some responsive design features for this website, however was not able to make the site as functional for mobile devices as was my original aim. I was successful in getting some features to work responsively, such as many of the object containers on the site (the contact form is within a container, the images and info on the label pages are within a container, etc.), the majority of the text, and many of the images. However, my attempts at getting things such as the collapsible navigation menu, some of the content within the object containers, and so on to be responsive was not successful, primarily because of the way in which I had approached the design and functionality of these features from a computer‑user perspective rather than considering first how they would translate to mobile. After building this website and attempting to apply responsive design features on it after the fact, I now understand why web designers are encouraged to design for mobile first. Despite the fact that the site design is not as responsive as I would like, I am still happy with the outcome for a first attempt. 

### **Feature Implementation**

The primary feature of the Birds on Booze Bottles site is the grid of label images on the home page. The fact that images are automatically inline block elements made the design and implementation of this feature much easier than I had anticipated. I began gathering and editing the images for the homepage grid prior to learning about image styling through CSS, so could have been saved time in the long run from editing all the images to be the same 200px X 200px size. However, this did make the final implementation of this feature easier since I did not have to apply a class to the images to force them to resize appropriately. 

The second most important feature of the site is the Explore section. Since the primary pages of this feature mimicked the work already done to create the home page, implementation again was easier than I had originally anticipated. However, what was more difficult was organizing and keeping track of the number of pages required to make this section function and the work needed to link all these pages together. As already stated, this feature of the site alone was 357 pages of work and while I was able to carry much of the design and implementation over from work done already on the home page and individual label pages, changes did have to be made in the HTML to many of the links, from page to page as well as to image files, and several different classes had to be assigned through CSS. Using a numbering system within the HTML and clear labelling in my CSS code was extremely helpful in successfully implementing this feature. 

The third and final most important feature of Birds on Booze Bottles is the Contact page. Much of the implementation of this feature involved copying from a w3Schools tutorial and then playing with
the HTML and CSS code line by line to understand which pieces were impacting the different fields. The final contact form opens an email to be sent to the site administrator, however the fields in the email are not populated automatically. I feel that, out of the lessons I learned and applied to my site, my understanding of forms remains one of the weakest and will be an area of improvement for me in future. Ideally the database that will be built behind this site will include an area for contact form submissions to be directed to using PHP. 

### **Resources**

I primarily (and heavily) referenced w3schools while building my Birds on Booze Bottles website. The tutorials on this site for both my basic understanding of HTML and CSS as well as how to implement more complicated elements was hugely helpful. I preferred this resource above all others due to the way in which tutorials are laid out in small chunks with example code and optional additional interactive code tutorials along the way. Each tutorial lays out only the essential information needed without unnecessary fluff or filler in between. 

Other than w3schools, I did not reference many other sources. The course textbook, “Head First HTML and CSS,” was probably my second most used resource, however I tended to only reference it if I remembered that something I recently read in the text applied to something I was trying to implement on my site. I did not especially like using the textbook as I found all the filler (the jokes, goofy scenarios, stock characters, etc.) in between information distracting and unhelpful when I was trying to find information on how to do something specific. Additionally, many of the scenarios in the text did not come with example code as often as I would like and, when they did, I felt the code was far less helpful than the examples I could find on w3schools. 

### **Lessons Learned**

Aside from learning how to code in HTML and CSS, the most important lesson I learned in building this website is that much of web design is simply searching the internet and learning from what others are doing and the tutorials you can find. The resources and communities openly available to help others with their designs is encouraging and makes me feel that I can continue expanding my knowledge of HTML and CSS as well as many other coding languages on my own long after this class is over. 

Another key takeaway I had from the process of designing my website is that creating a site which is both responsive and usable to a wide range of users and devices takes a good deal of pre‑implementation planning. I first designed my site and implemented features from the perspective of a computer user, which then created layers of issues later in the process when I began attempting to enforce some responsive features on top of the existing design. Good design does not happen by accident and it takes careful thought and expertise to create a site which is both beautiful and accessible across multiple platforms and to a wide range of users. 

Finally, relating to the previous point, creating even the most basic website is a fair amount of work and the smallest change to the site content can have big impact on the existing code and layout. As such, it is important to carefully think through the design prior to beginning implementation and from there to code as simply and logically as possible so that future changes can be implemented with ease. The more complex your website design is at the beginning, the harder it will be to make changes down the line.

The best website design will be both simple to use and pleasant to look at and the code behind
it will be well organized and accomplish key features in the most straightforward ways possible. This will allow for a site that can continue to grow and change well into the future while remaining accessible to both the user and the designer and is something I will keep in mind when moving forward in my website design pursuits.